\chapter*{Acknoledgements}

First and foremost, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my
supervisor Professor Shinji Shimojo. Professor Shimojo continuosly
convincingly conveyed a spirit of adventure and excitement to this study. His
excellent advices based on his deep knowledge always provided a unique
perspective and new meaning to this study.

Sincere thanks also goes to Professor Takahiro Hara, Professor Toru Fujiwara,
Professor Makoto Onizuka, Professor Yasuyuki Matsushita and Professor Norihiro
Hagita at Department of Multimedia Engineering, Graduate School of Information
Science and Technology, Osaka University for their appropriate guidance.

I would like to express my deepest appreciation to Associate Professor Susumu
Date at Cybermedia Center, Osaka University, for his patient and enthusiastic
guidance along my studies. His exceptional ability to analyze, solve and
present scientific problems has constantly impressed me. Without his support
and encouragement, this disseration would not have been possible.

I also would like to thank Associate Professor Yoshiyuki Kido and Associate
Professor Kazuhide Kojima at Cybermedia Center, Osaka University, for their
their encouragement, insightful comments, and hard questions.

This study greatly benefited from the comments and advices from Professor
Kaname Harumoto at Osaka University Institute for Datability Science,
Associate Professor Hiroki Kashiwazaki at Cybermedia Center, Osaka University,
Dr.~Eiji Kawai at National Institute of Information and Communications
Technology, Associate Professor Kohei Ichikawa at Nara Institute of Science
and Technology, Associate Professor Hirotake Abe at University of Tsukuba,
Assistant Professor Yasuhiro Watashiba at Cybermedia Center, Osaka University
and Dr.~Hiroaki Yamanaka at National Institute of Information and
Communications Technology. Their suggestions improved the quality of this
thesis much further.

I would like to thank all the students at Shimojo laboratory for the sleepless
nights we worked together before deadlines, and for all the fun we had. It was
a great pleasure working with you.

I would like express my hearfelt gratitude to my parents, Toshihito Takahashi
and Naoko Takahashi, for their continuous support, encourgement and care. They
made me the person who I am today.

Finally, but most importantly, I would like to express my deepest gratitude
and appreciation to my wife Ziyan Xu for her unconditional love and support
throughout my studies and my personal life.
