\pagestyle{myheadings}
\markright{}
\chapter*{Summary}

% 背景
Recent breakthroughs in science have significantly benefited from high
performance computing~(HPC). The majority of HPC systems today adopt cluster
architecture to achieve their massive scalable computing performance. A
cluster is a system of computers connected through a high-performance network
referred to as an interconnect. In a cluster, processes running on different
computing nodes work collectively by exchanging data and messages with one
another over the interconnect. Therefore, the communication performance of the
interconnect is critically important in determining the total computing
performance of a cluster.

% 問題
The inter-process communication of an application running on a cluster system
shows a distinctive pattern that originates from the mathematical model,
discretization method and parallelization strategy used in the application.
The design of an interconnect could be highly optimized for a representative
application expected on the target system by taking the communication pattern
of the application into account. However, this design approach is infeasible
and unrealistic when designing a real-world cluster, since many users share a
single HPC system and each user runs various applications. Therefore, in
contrast to the application-dependent communication pattern, the interconnect
is inherently designed in an application-independent manner. As a result,
imbalance in the packet flow on the interconnect can occur under a particular
combination of communication pattern and interconnect. This imbalance can lead
to traffic congestion on a link in the interconnect, which lowers the
throughtput of communication and degrades the total application performance as
a result.

% 目的
This dissertation tackles this degradation of application performance by
adapting the control of packet flow in the interconnect to the communication
pattern of applications. Until recently, such dynamic adaptation of the
interconnect control has been deemed infeasible due to the lack of a
networking architecture, technology, or technique that allows flexible and
dynamic reconfiguration. However, the recent emergence of programmable
networking architectures exemplified by Software-Defined Networking~(SDN) has
opened up the possibility to realize such adaptation. This dissertation aims
to overcome this shortcoming of conventional application-independent
interconnects described in the last paragraph, by establishing a programmable
interconnect control that dynamically manages the packet flow in the
interconnect based on the communication pattern of applications.

% 課題
Following three challenges must be met to achieve the goal described above:
(1) analyzing the packet flow in the interconnect, (2) accelerating MPI
communication by dynamically controlling the packet flow in the interconnect,
and (3) coordinating the execution of application and interconnect control.

% 提案1
To address the first challenge, Chapter~\ref{sec:ii} proposes PFAnalyzer, a
toolset for analyzing the packet flow in the interconnect. When designing and
implementing an efficient programmable interconnect control, researchers need
to conduct a systematic analysis over many combinations of applications and
interconnects. Since performing such an analysis on a physical cluster is
time-consuming, this research utilizes simulation to facilitate the analysis.
The proposed toolset is a pair of tools: an interconnect simulator
specialized for programmable interconnects, and a profiler to collect
communication pattern from MPI applications. PFSim allows researchers and
designers working on interconnects to investigate congestion in the
interconnect for an arbitrary cluster configuration and a set of communication
patterns extracted by PFProf. We evaluate the accuracy of the simulation
results obtained from PFSim and demonstrate how PFAnalyzer can be used to
analyze the effect of programmable interconnect control.

% 提案2
To address the second challenge, Chapter~\ref{sec:iii} proposes a framework to
accelerate MPI collectives by dynamically controlling the packet flow in the
interconnect. Out of the communication primitives provided by MPI, this
research focuses on accelerating collective communication because it consumes
a significant fraction of the execution time of applications. The network
programmability provided by Software-Defined Networking is integrated into MPI
collectives in such a way that collectives are able to effectively utilize the
bandwidth of the interconnect. In particular, this research aims to reduce the
execution time of MPI\_Allreduce, which is a frequently used MPI collective
communication in many simulation codes. The speedup of MPI\_Allreduce when
using the proposed collective acceleration framework is evaluated.

% 提案3
To address the third challenge, Chapter~\ref{sec:iv} proposes UnisonFlow, a
software-defined coordination mechanism that performs interconnect control in
synchronization with the execution of applications. In a real-world
application, the communication pattern changes with the execution of
application. Therefore, a mechanism to coordinate packet flow control and
execution of application is essential. UnisonFlow is a kernel-assisted
mechanism that realizes such coordination in a per-packet basis while
maintaining significantly low overhead. Evaluation verifies that the
interconnect control can be successfully performed in synchronization with the
execution of the application and the overhead imposed by the coordination
mechanismi is small.

Chapter~\ref{sec:v} concludes this dissertation and discusses future works.

\pagestyle{headings}
